# Redis University 101 Introduction to Redis Data Structures
See https://university.redis.com/courses/course-v1:redislabs+RU101+2022_07/courseware/3f48285e65d245419daadc40da4a38bc/b1687f28f87a4138a860fa7bf4e8a2f1/?child=first

Overview.
Redis is an in-memory but persistent on disk database, so it represents a different trade off where very high write and read speed is achieved with the limitation of data sets that can't be larger than memory
Testing your use case is trivial. Use the redis-benchmark utility to generate random data sets then check the space used with the INFO memory command.

https://redis.io/docs/getting-started/faq/
## Redis Data Structures
### Keys
Amy binary structure can be a key, up to 512 MB
Lenght vs readability

### Logical Databases 
logical database is identified by a zero-based index. The default is database 0.  Within a logical database, the key names are unique as mentioned. 
But the same key name can appear in multiple logical databases,

In practical terms, they are best  suited when you need separate key spaces for a single application rather than separating

REdis cluster only supports Database 0

Normally just using database 0

Often colo : used to seperate parts of names..

Case sensitive.. 

e.g. user:1000:followers


## Redis commands
Cheatsheet. https://gist.github.com/LeCoupa/1596b8f359ad8812c7271b5322c30946
https://lzone.de/cheat-sheet/Redis

YouTube tut. https://youtu.be/jgpVdJB2sKQ

set customer:10000 fred   [EX seconds] [PC mills] [NX| XX] ## Can be atomic, and check if key does not exist (NX) or already exists XX (update)
get customer:10000

# Can set keys to expire using 
EXPIRE # in seconds
or PXPIRE # in milli seconds

TTL <key> # THis will show how much time left before key expires

PERSIST <key> # this will make key persistent (not expire) 

keys    # ALways block until complete. Never use in Prod.. Useful fo debuggin at non-Prod
scan # Iterates using cursor.. Blcoks but only for iteration
GetRange : returns substring

keys *
keys custome:1*

## Can increase or decrase values if encoded as number int
INCR <key>
INCRBY <key> <amount>
DECRBy <key> <amount>

TYPE <key>  # returns type of key.. Note often string, but if its a number thne can be incr or decr

OBJECT encoding <key>  # returns encoding.. Can change over time e.g. in example ru101 was int, then encstr..  

scan 0 MATCH customer:1*    # May need to run multiple times using start point returned each time

del <key>   delete key, and clear memory.. blolcks
unlink customer:1000   # Returns number of keys removed.. removes link.. not blocking. Memory remvoed as part of async cleanup
exists customer:10000


Finished on week 1 Keys.. Strings next


# Types
See https://redis.io/docs/data-types/

redis allows you to set different types all based of key.. this was a area of confusion for me initiallly. e.g. set.. Set is still keyed, but its values must be unique 

* Strings. 
Redis string is a sequence of bytes. ...

* Hashes. 
A Redis hash is a collection of key value pairs. NO NESTING Under a main key. O(1). Typical uses are rate limiting and session mgmt.
Hashes allow individual fields to be manipulated. This saves CPU, Network and other resources when only a single of a subset of fields are required.
However, you cannot expire fields within a hash, the expiration can only be set on the Key, which therefore includes all fields.
CAn add remove, etc. on indiividual elements in hash (ie.e key and field), or hgetAll to return all fields.  
HGET
HLEN Size of hash
HMGET  returns multiple specified fields.. 
HKEYS returns all keys for a given hash key. 
HDEL  Remove a field from a hash.. WHen last field is removed, entire key is removed.
HSET / HMSET  SEt and multiple set
hExists
HGetAll  O(n) /N is number of keys in hash. 
HIncrBy  / HIncrByFloat allows field to be incremented.
HScan  Not blocking.. Preferred over hgetAll. scans over fields in case of lots of fields that might slow sdown hget, 
HDel etc


* Lists. 
Redis Lists are simply lists of strings, sorted by insertion order. ...
O(1) unless noted, WIth L annd R ops can be uswed for lists, stacks or queues.implemnted as doubly linked list
RPush Lpush
Rpop Lpop
Lrange O(s+n)  s is ddiff from start offset to head
llen
ltrim  removes stuff. SPecify what we want to keep
ltrim 0 2  means keep 0,1 but remove others
ltrim -2 -1 means keep right 2 most entries

For sorted sets use zRemRangeByRank key start stop.. But opposite.. Here specify objs to remove not keep

* Sets. 
Redis Sets are an unordered collection of strings, no order. ...  Has example where  One set for online players, abnd each play has another set for player friends. Then intersectoin of these shows online friends
sadd   add member
scard   how bug is set (length)
sismember
srem remove given element(s)
spop remove random n elements 
sDiff / sInter sUnion  for diff intersect and union
sInterStore sUnionStore  for  intersect and union to a new destination set

* Sorted Sets.
maintain order by each string's associated score. 
Same as set but prefixed by z, e.g zadd, . Pass in value used for sorting.. Can be usecd in leaderboards or priority queues
zadd
zrange ZRANGE returns values based on position and not by score
zrangebySCORE <key> <min> <max>  Allows you to list those with values above or below a thereshold. Min = minscore (by default inclusive, but with bracket ( exclusive ) ). Max = max score. Can be +inf
zevrange    reverse range
zrank    rank or position
zRemRangeByRank key start stop.. Here specify objs to remove not keep
e.g. keep 3 lowest scors.. .zremrangebyrank myzset 3 -1
Can remove from other end by using -1 as start e.g.
 ZREMRANGEBYRANK hw2-3 -1 1
e.g.  hw1-8
the parens symbol "(" indicates an exclusive range, which meets the requirements of greater than 3.
zRemRangeByScore   remove elements by score
Lookups etc O(log n)

zDiff / zInter zUnion  for diff intersect and union.. Has score
zInterStore zUnionStore  for  intersect and union to a new destination set. Can weigh scores too as these may differ
Note these can merge sorted sets and ordinary sets

See example in RU102J uses, e.g. needs to make these unique so no clashes . THats why minutes is at end
KEY = prefix:metric:day:siteId:temp:min, e.g. 18 Wattss at 1 min on date   
app:metric:whG:2022-09-30:18.0:1  
VALUE = temp:minute to generate unique key
store  multiple metrics in key, and allow us to query range

* Streams
A Redis stream is a data structure that acts like an append-only log. Streams help record events in the order they occur and then syndicate them for processing. For more information.
Redis streams support several trimming strategies (to prevent streams from growing unbounded) and more than one consumption strategy (see XREAD, XREADGROUP, and XRANGE).

xadd 

* Geospacial indexes
Redis geospatial indexes are useful for finding locations within a given geographic radius or bounding box. For more information:#

1.. GEOADD
1.. GEORADIUS  lists items within a radius of here.. can sort, and show lat/long
1.. 

* Bitmaps
let you perform bitwise operations on strings. 
bset
bget#
bscan   

* BitData such as Bitfield / BitArray
Encode multiple lenght integer variables
e.g. efficiently encode multiple counters in a string value. 
Bitfields provide atomic get, set, and increment operations and support different overflow policies. 
Note type of these fields is string. However encoding is raw (not embstr)
but we can set integers (can be signed i, ou u8 unsigned 8 bit number for example) and use incr on them.
if a get is called on a bitfielld ie get <key> hex value is returned, unlike if bitfield <key> get is called.

In example we have a binary 2d array and get set fields to 0 or 1 to map where a charecter has moved in a game.

Note can apply multiple gets aor sets on a single command (keep appending)

Other examples are map, for gaming. Or seat booking.. Probably also used for temp sensor in Java course.

BITPOS will return the position of a bit, either set or unset depending on the arguments passed.

GETBIT <key> <id o> gets the bit at the given offset.
SETBIT sets or clears the bit at the given offset.
BITCOUNT will return the number of *set* bits, but not the position. Can be used to see how many set fields in key
BITPOS can be used to find the index of the first set or unset bit.
BITFIELD allows bits to be retrieved.
BITOP allows logical operators to be applied to bitfields.


*bitfield*. Allows manipualtion of vartiable lenght integers
When calls bitfield offset can be automatically calculated by using #<num, e.g. #4 will bring you to the3 4th offset of the given size>
bitfield <key> [get type offset] 
bitfield <key> [set type offset value]
bitfield <key> [incrby type offset value]
bitfield <key> [overflow wrap|sat|fail]

*BitArray*
Think of a bit array as a string from left to
right with the most significant bit as the first byte at index 0. Bits are
always limited by the maximum size of a string but it's not recommended to store
and manipulate such large bit fields.

ex.
bitfield  ba-q1 set u8 #0 42
bitfield  ba-q2 set u8 #0 19
bitop and ba-q3 ba-q1 ba-q2

What does the following command return?

bitfield ba-q3 get u8 #0
Both BITFIELD commands will set the two binary values at position zero, or at the first byte of each key.


The BITOP command performs a logical AND on the binary values

     ba-q1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0
     ba-q2 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1
AND
     ba-q3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0

The resulting value is the binary value 1 0 (or two in decimal).

we used this with xor for seat reservation system, along with creating unique keys with nx (inlt create if not already created) and short ttl to temporarily book a seay while reservation is runnin
## Operations
keys
smembers
zrange
zrevrange    
zRevRangeWithScores    
reverese range with scores

## Publish Subsctibe
See https://redis.io/commands#pubsub 
Fire and forget
* subscribe <channel> ... <channelN>. Blocking command, This session now just waits for items.
When you sub, you get message in format
'''
"message"
<channel>
<actual message>
'''

### Commands
https://redis.io/commands/psubscribe/

* PUBSUB CHANNELS
* PUBSUB NUMPAT
* PUBSUB NUMSUB
* PUBSUB SHARDCHANNELS
* PUBSUB SHARDNUMSUB
* PSUBSCRIBE   ## paterned subscribe.. allows wildcards * ? [Xx] ^  

Be careful making toomany subscribers as thesde can effect perf
psubscribe ch-? # this will sub to ch-[1..9] or [a..Z]


The PUBSUB command as a number of sub commands.
CHANNELS will return the list of active
channels. That is a channel with a client subscription. NUMSUB returns the number
of subscribers excluding patterned subscribers.
NUMPAT returns the number of patterned subscribers and the number of patterns.

### PubSub Examples
Example of using PubSub for analytics
Sales by Event, and SalesByTimeOfDay
See https://github.com/redislabs-training/ru101/blob/main/redisu/ru101/uc04-notifications/notify.py



## Performance Keys
### Faceted searches
#### Object Inspection
Regardless of the distribution of values for one or more attributes that need to be matched, every matching key will always need to be retrieved and inspected. In a relational database, this is analogous to performing a FULL TABLE SCAN without indexes.


For very small numbers of keys (for example fewer than 100), this may be still ok. But it's clearly not appropriate for millions of keys.

#### Using Sets
There are two limiting factors for faceted searches using Sets. Firstly is the data distribution of matching attribute values. The second is the number of attributes being matches.


This pattern relies on SINTER, which has a time complexity of O(N * M), when N is cardinality of the smallest Set and M is the number of Sets. So as the Cardinality of smallest set increases or the number of attribute being matched (i.e. the number of Sets be be examined) increases, then the cost of this method increases.

#### Hashed lookups
Create keys using hash of values
e.g. 
hash( medalEvent:true+DisabledAccess:true+venue)
hash( medalEvent:true+DisabledAccess:false+venue)
etc

hard to read table manually but prog can do it
The hashed faceting method will result in a Set which contains keys for each matching object with the attribute values being searched for.


The limiting factor is therefore the cardinality of the of number of matches for any given attribute combination.

SubmitSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.


## Big O
redis commands are each atomic, so a klist of them will get queued up and run in order. its important therefore to know the time fpr comands

Each command has known time complexity.
Note other things than just the BigO is necessary when considering  time complexity, e.g. hash with one character key, vs a 512 MB key will differe in performance despite O(1)
Also lpop and rpop might have different clock time even though same time complexity

Time complexity defines the outside influences on a command. For example, the size of the structure being navigated. However, wall clock execution time is dependant on other factors, such as the amount of the data that needs to be transported, the cost of execution of the command, other pending commands etc.

* O(1)  
append, exists, get, set, hget, lpush, rpush, lpop, rpop, del (unlink preferred, only O(1) when removing string key type)

* O(N)  
del when removing multipe keys

* O(M)
 when key been removed contains list / set/ sorted set/ hash, where M is the number of elements in the list/ set.. Note this removes whole object not just  elements of list/ set etc.

 * O(N*M)  
sInter   N cardinality of smaller set   M number of sets

* O(S+M)
lrange   .  S distance of offset from head    N  number of elements requested.. for larger sets assume S is distance from head or tail

e/g what is time complecity for 

lrange my-list 9 17

Correct answer is S = 10, N = 9

Positions are zero based, so position 9 is the 10th element in the list, making S=10.

The ending position is 17, or the 18th element. Since the end position is inclusive, elements 10 through 18 have to be returned, so N = 9.

# transactions
Transactions are simply a serialized queue of pending commands that Redis will execute sequentially. Since Redis doesn’t execute a transaction until all queued commands are executed with an EXEC command, DISCARD simply needs to throw away this list of pending commands.

Unlike other Databases, there are no command to undo in Redis, because commands are only applied when EXEC is called.

*Tranactions are applied to a given shard (in clustered instances) So all keys that woudl be involved in a transaction need to be stored on same shard if transactions are to be used.*

* multi
* exec.. Returns nil if didn't run or run in failure.. 

* DISCARD.. discards transaction (before exec)
DISCARD throws away queued up commands. In a Transaction, the commands are not applied until the EXEC command is executed, so there are no commands to undo.

* WATCH    .CAlled before multi.  Allow check and set behaviour. Part of redis' optimistic locking.. *Before* calling multi you can watch a number of keys. If these are changed before calling exec, then trasnactino will fail. (exec will return nil)

note syntax errors mark txn as invalid but
programming errors are just skipped e.g. incr on string fie;d
no rollback
no nested txns
this keeps things simple and fast

Note with transactions, we sometimes need to call reads outside transactions tp get  value and make decisions based off it.. e.g. in example on ticket reservation.. ru101
A Transaction can be made up of Read and Write commands. The reason why the HGET was called outside of the Transaction, is that the current value is required because it is tested in the next line of code.
If the HGET was queued in the transaction, then this variable would not have a value.

* question in hw wrong 
What would cause an EXEC command to fail?

When an attempt is made to queue a command with a syntax error, then the Transaction is automatically marked as invalid. If EXEC is called, then the Transaction will be discarded.


If the Transaction is dependent on a watched key(s), and that key changes, then the Transaction is also automatically discarded when EXEC is called.


If a queued command operates on the wrong datatype, for example executing an INCR on a List datatype, then Redis skips this command but continues to execute the subsequent commands in the queue. So in this circumstance, it does not cause the Transaction to fail.

# Object Storage
See chapter on different strategies.
All in one object (e.g. a hash) where sub objects are encoded as keys
Advantages are easy to implelent. Delete key deletes all ( cacade )

Alternative is to have multiple keys. One for main object and then extra entries (named with similar key and :extension) for child objects. Allows more manipulation and optinos on queries for child elements (and things like incr etc.), but probably with increased complexity for creation and deletion. Also all keys need to be stored on same shard if transactions are to be used.

# Inventory control example
## Requirements
* Tickets can be purchased only once
* Tickets to be held during purchase flow
* Held tickets get automatically returned to pool if purchase not completed or times out.
* Purchased tickets can be viewed
* Customers can make mulktiple puchases at same event.

## My Flow:
Available Tickets : Key [eventId:ticket:available  SeatNum]: Set
inFlightPurchase : Key [eventId:ticket:inFlight:SeatNum]:   String 
Purchased Ticket : Key [eventId:ticket:purchased:SeatNum: <seatNum>, data <date>]: Set or Hash

Purchase Flow: 
    Txn{
        Check is available && is not in inflight table
        If so create inFlgiht option with 3 min expiry.
        At end of process, delete inFlgiht, delete Avaiable entry (not key)and add to purchasedTicket
    }
When ticket purchased create transaction to delete from available, and create purchased

## Ans
Phase1: See 
https://github.com/redislabs-training/ru101/blob/main/redisu/ru101/uc02-inventory-control/inventory.py#L59

Phase 2:
Introduce a reserve step.
This will store holds in a seperate hash

Phase 3: 
See https://github.com/redislabs-training/ru101/blob/main/redisu/ru101/uc03-seat-reservation/seat_reservation.py 

create method creatEvents
This will create a hashap and set for each event
hashmap will have entry per sku for each event, and store price, and availability
Set will be a list of all events by SKU
> type events
> scard events

When Purchase.. 
  Create txn. (pipeline)
    Watch the event:<sku> key
    If it changes txn will be aborted (try catch.. p.reset)
    Note Avail is checked outside of txn.. We want the current value. Not necessarily value in txn
    if(avail> qty)
        incr by -qty
        generateOrder

  Check event
  Deduct
  Create Sales order
  See https://github.com/redislabs-training/ru101/blob/main/redisu/ru101/uc02-inventory-control/inventory.py#L74