# RU102J  Redis for Java developers
See https://university.redis.com/courses/course-v1:redislabs+RU102J+2022_07/courseware/e705a681da864319a38947db2d14f3fb/a6d2716e1169488d8c4243d1f07cc0e3/?child=first

For clients see https://redis.com/blog/jedis-vs-lettuce-an-exploration/

Ending on Week1 Overview

# Week 2 
## Lua scripting
This is a scripting language for Resis that allwos atomic actions. It can be called directly from jedis

var sha = jedis.scriptLoad()  // loads th4 script
jedis.evalsha(sha, key, args) // pass in sha plus list of keys and args

## Pipelining
Pipelining sends multiple commands to the Redis server in one network round trip. This improves performance by minimizing network latency and reducing the need for expensive syscalls.

Calling sync() tells Jedis to send all commands in the pipeline to the Redis server. Each command is then executed in order, and all of the results are returned at once after the last command has finished.

NOte these are not atomic.. so transactionality might not be possible, If you want that use transactions or Lua sctipting

Setup with jedis.pipeline().. Trigger with p.sync().

## Transaction
Similar to pipelining but doesn't allow other clients to run in parallel

Setup with jedis.multi()... Run with t.exec()
Redis guarantees that both transactions and Lua scripts are executed atomically on the server. This means that no other client's commands will run at this time. When using a pipeline, commands in the pipeline will be executed in order, but commands from other clients may be run between them. Commands sent to the server from different connections will be executed in the order that they are received.

# Observability

## Commands from CLI
* info
Output can be read or (preferrably) run from a cron job and piped to a file, Note if using auth can pass in with -a, or use REDIS_AUTH variable
  142  export REDISCLI_AUTH=a_strong_password
  143  redis-cli info > info
  144  cat info
  145  export REDISCLI_AUTH=

Also can use history -d to delete any incriminating history 
> redis-cli INFO STATS > redis-info-stats

## Latency and stats data via redis-cli options
The redis-cli client has some built-in options that allow you to pull some real-time latency and stats data.

Note: these are not available as commands from Redis but as options in redis-cli.

THis is like top it keeps running,
$ redis-cli --latency
min: 1, max: 17, avg: 4.03 (927 samples)

or use -csv to get more concise output, over 1 second by default
$ redis-cli --latency --csv
1,4,1.94,78

$ redis-cli --latency-dist # gives some colour

From CLI
> LATENCY DOCTOR
I'm sorry, Dave, I can't do that. Latency monitoring is disabled in this Redis instance. You may use "CONFIG SET latency-monitor-threshold <milliseconds>." in order to enable it. If we weren't in a deep space mission I'd suggest to take a look at https://redis.io/topics/latency-monitor.

### Latency Monitoring
As we know Redis is fast and as a result is often used in very extreme scenarios where low latency is a must. Redis has a feature called Latency Monitoring which allows you to dig into possible latency issues. Latency monitoring is composed of the following conceptual parts:

Latency hooks that sample different latency sensitive code paths.
Time series recording of latency spikes split by different events.
A reporting engine to fetch raw data from the time series.
Analysis engine to provide human readable reports and hints according to the measurements.
By default this feature is disabled because most of the time it is not needed. In order to enable it you can update the threshold time in milliseconds that you want to monitor in your Redis configuration. Events that take longer than the threshold will be logged as latency spikes. The threshold configuration should be set accordingly if the requirement is to identify all events blocking the server for a time of 10 milliseconds or more.

latency-monitor-threshold 10
If the debugging session is intended to be temporary the threshold can be set via redis-cli.

127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG SET latency-monitor-threshold 10
To disable the latency framework the threshold should be set back to 0.

127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG SET latency-monitor-threshold 0
The latency data can be viewed using the LATENCY command with it's subcommands:


## Stats
$ redis-cli --stats
------- data ------ --------------------- load -------------------- - child -
keys       mem      clients blocked requests            connections
1          683.21K  1       0       509 (+0)            7

## Info Sections
Server: the current Redis server info.

Metrics of note:
* redis_version
* process_id
* config_file
* uptime_in_seconds
* uptime_in_days
* Clients: available data on clients connected or failed connections.

Metrics of note:
* connected_clients
* blocked_clients
* Memory: memory usage and stats

Metrics of note:
* used_memory
* mem_fragmentation_ratio
* Persistence: RDB or AOF metrics

Metrics of note:
* rdb_last_save_time
* rdb_changes_since_last_save
* aof_rewrite_in_progress
* Stats: some general statistics

Metrics of note:
* keyspace_hits
* keyspace_misses
* expired_keys
* evicted_keys
* instantaneous_ops_per_sec
* Replication: replication data including primary/replica identifiers and offsets

Metrics of note:
* master_link_down_since
* connected_slaves
* master_last_io_seconds_ago
* CPU: compute consumption stats

Metrics of note:
* used_cpu_sys
* used_cpu_user
* Modules: data from any loaded modules

Metrics of note (per module):
* ver
* options
* Cluster: whether cluster is enabled

Metric of note:
* cluster_enabled
* Keyspace: keys and expiration data

Metrics of note (per db):
* keys
* expires
* avg_ttl
