


# Initial Tuning
See https://university.redis.com/courses/course-v1:redislabs+RU301+2022_11/courseware/d22e196b864e48889529aec944f4a185/a779a3a45ac543e09245864ff7702d51/?child=first 
Initial Tuning
 Bookmarked
We love Redis because it’s fast (and fun!), so as we begin to consider scaling out Redis, we first want to make sure we've done everything we can to maximize its performance.

Let's start by looking at some important tuning parameters.

Max Clients
Redis has a default of max of 10,000 clients; after that maximum has been reached, Redis will respond to all new connections with an error. If you have a lot of connections (or a lot of application instances), then you may need to go higher. You can set the max number of simultaneous clients in the Redis config file:

maxclients 20000
Max Memory
By default, Redis has no max memory limit, so it will use all available system memory. If you are using replication, you will want to limit the memory usage in order to have overhead for replica output buffers. It’s also a good idea to leave memory for the system. Something like 25% overhead. You can update this setting in Redis config file:

# memory size in bytes  
maxmemory 1288490188
Set tcp-backlog
The Redis server uses the value of tcp-backlog to specify the size of the complete connection queue.

Redis passes this configuration as the second parameter of the listen(int s, int backlog) call.

If you have many connections, you will need to set this higher than the default of 511. You can update this in Redis config file:

# TCP listen() backlog. 
# 
# In high requests-per-second environments you need an high backlog in order 
# to avoid slow clients connections issues. Note that the Linux kernel 
# will silently truncate it to the value of /proc/sys/net/core/somaxconn so 
# make sure to raise both the value of somaxconn and tcp_max_syn_backlog 
# in order to get the desired effect.
tcp-backlog 65536
As the comment in redis.conf indicates, the value of somaxconn and tcp_max_syn_backlog may need to be increased at the OS level as well.

Set read replica configurations
One simple way to scale Redis is to add read replicas and take load off of the primary. This is most effective when you have a read-heavy (as opposed to write-heavy) workload. You will probably want to have the replica available and still serving stale data, even if the replication is not completed. You can update this in the Redis config:

slave-serve-stale-data yes
You will also want to prevent any writes from happening on the replicas. You can update this in the Redis config:

slave-read-only yes
Kernel memory
Under high load, occasional performance dips can occur due to memory allocation. This is something Salvatore, the creator of Redis, blogged about in the past. The performance issue is related to transparent hugepages, which you can disable at the OS level if needed.

$ echo 'never' > /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
Kernel network stack
If you plan on handling a large number of connections in a high performance environment, we recommend tuning the following kernel parameters:

vm.swappiness=0                       # turn off swapping
net.ipv4.tcp_sack=1                   # enable selective acknowledgements
net.ipv4.tcp_timestamps=1             # needed for selective acknowledgements
net.ipv4.tcp_window_scaling=1         # scale the network window
net.ipv4.tcp_congestion_control=cubic # better congestion algorithm
net.ipv4.tcp_syncookies=1             # enable syn cookies
net.ipv4.tcp_tw_recycle=1             # recycle sockets quickly
net.ipv4.tcp_max_syn_backlog=NUMBER   # backlog setting
net.core.somaxconn=NUMBER             # up the number of connections per port
net.core.rmem_max=NUMBER              # up the receive buffer size
net.core.wmem_max=NUMBER              # up the buffer size for all connections
File descriptor limits
If you do not set the correct number of file descriptors for the Redis user, you will see errors indicating that “Redis can’t set maximum open files..” You can increase the file descriptor limit at the OS level.

Here's an example on Ubuntu using systemd:

/etc/systemd/system/redis.service
[Service] 
... 
User=redis 
Group=redis 
...
LimitNOFILE=65536 
...
You will then need to reload the daemon and restart the redis service.

Enabling RPS (Receive Packet Steering) and CPU preferences
One way we can improve performance is to prevent Redis from running on the same CPUs as those handling any network traffic. This can be accomplished by enabling RPS for our network interfaces and creating some CPU affinity for our Redis process.

Here is an example. First we can enable RPS on CPUs 0-1:

$ echo '3' > /sys/class/net/eth1/queues/rx-0/rps_cpus
Then we can set the CPU affinity for redis to CPUs 2-8:

# config is set to write pid to /var/run/redis.pid
$ taskset -pc 2-8 `cat /var/run/redis.pid`
pid 8946's current affinity list: 0-8
pid 8946's new affinity list: 2-8


# Pesistence
2 ways
1.. Snapshots (RDB)
1.. AOF Append Only file

Snapshots can be configured to run at intervals and to run as background task, but will leave gaps between snapshot and any subsequent writes. Config this in cli or redis.conf.
Example https://university.redis.com/courses/course-v1:redislabs+RU301+2022_11/courseware/0082579b783e445d99d7eb730a2c45df/8d91726081364ba4a53bd9443028fc86/?child=first 
> saving this to redis.conf will snapshot if 3 keys updated in 20 sec
dbfilename my_backup_file.rdb
save 20 3


AOF can be configured different ways to write every transaction out.. Some will not lose data others will but probably less than snapshots.

ex. Be careful! We have a running server and we want this configuration to be applied without restarting it.

127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG SET appendonly yes
127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG SET appendfsync always
In order for these settings to be persisted to the redis.conf file we need to save them:

127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG REWRITE

# HA
Uses replication to reate Read Replicasm and automatic failover using Sentinel, to be able to switch primary. To use sentinel start redis in sentinel mode.

Data is written to Promaru. and replication will update replcias. Initially RDB used to quickly get replica up to state of last snapshot.. Then use AOF to catch up and keep it in sync,

By default replication is async, but can be set to sync to not lose any writes.
Note async means that redis acknowledges write before replicating, so it couls lose it.

The otherm using wait <num replicas> <timeout> would mean that it must replicate to n replicas 
before ACKing, obviously slower writes this way.

Redis Enterprise has active active feature, to allow geographical replucation.

When a primary starts it write 2 files for replication e.g. 

264:M 18 Nov 2022 08:03:32.251 * Creating AOF base file primary.aof.1.base.rdb on server start
264:M 18 Nov 2022 08:03:32.260 * Creating AOF incr file primary.aof.1.incr.aof on server start

When starting a replica is syncs with the master first e.g.
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.540 * Ready to accept connections
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.542 * Connecting to MASTER 127.0.0.1:6379
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.559 * MASTER <-> REPLICA sync started
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.560 * Non blocking connect for SYNC fired the event.
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.562 * Master replied to PING, replication can continue...
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:10.586 * Partial resynchronization not possible (no cached master)
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.242 * Full resync from master: d2870ebe9c56b40bfc226738a168466b49e754d9:0
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.250 * MASTER <-> REPLICA sync: receiving streamed RDB from master with EOF to disk
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.251 * MASTER <-> REPLICA sync: Flushing old data
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.251 * MASTER <-> REPLICA sync: Loading DB in memory
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.298 * Loading RDB produced by version 7.0.5
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.298 * RDB age 0 seconds
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.298 * RDB memory usage when created 0.63 Mb
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.298 * Done loading RDB, keys loaded: 0, keys expired: 0.
293:S 18 Nov 2022 08:07:15.298 * MASTER <-> REPLICA sync: Finished with success


## Steps

See https://university.redis.com/courses/course-v1:redislabs+RU301+2022_11/courseware/badd783edb4a49b4b2e150cc78d46c99/d8116e24ef2a41efb68044a15e222a88/?child=first 

# Step 1
First let’s create and configure the primary instance. We’ll start with a few configuration changes in its primary.conf configuration file.

$ touch primary.conf  # Create the configuration file
Now open the primary.conf file with your favourite text editor and set the following configuration directives:

# Create a strong password here
requirepass a_strong_password

# AUTH password of the primary instance in case this instance becomes a replica
masterauth a_strong_password

# Enable AOF file persistence
appendonly yes

# Choose a name for the AOF file
appendfilename "primary.aof"
Finally, let’s start the primary instance:

$ redis-server ./primary.conf
Step 2
Next, let’s prepare the configuration file for the replica:

$ touch replica.conf
Let’s add some settings to the file we just created:

# Port on which the replica should run
port 6380

# Address of the primary instance
replicaof 127.0.0.1 6379

# AUTH password of the primary instance
masterauth a_strong_password

# AUTH password for the replica instance
requirepass a_strong_password
And let’s start the replica:

$ redis-server ./replica.conf
Step 3
Open two terminal tabs and use them to start connections to the primary and replica instances:

# Tab 1 (primary)
$ redis-cli 

# Tab 2 (replica)
$ redis-cli -p 6380
Authenticate on both tabs by running the command AUTH followed by your password:

AUTH a_strong_password
On the second (replica) tab run the MONITOR command which will allow you to see every command executed against that instance.

Go back to the first (primary) tab and execute any write command, for example

127.0.0.1:6379> SET foo bar
In the second tab you should see that the command was already sent to the replica:

1617230062.389077 [0 127.0.0.1:6379] "SELECT" "0"
1617230062.389092 [0 127.0.0.1:6379] "set" "foo" "bar"
Step 4
Keep the instances running, or at least their configuration files around. We’ll need them for the next exercise.

## Sentinal
Decide that a primary instance is down
In order for the Sentinels to be able to decide that a primary instance is down we need to have enough Sentinels agree that the server is unreachable from their point of view.

Having a number of Sentinels agreeing that they need to take an action is called reaching a quorum. If the Sentinels can’t reach quorum, they cannot decide that the primary has failed. The exact number of Sentinels needed for quorum is configurable.

Triggering a failover
Once the Sentinels have decided that a primary instance is down, they need to elect and authorize a leader (a Sentinel instance) that will do the failover. A leader can only be chosen if the majority of the Sentinels agree on it.

In the final step, the leader will reconfigure the chosen replica to become a primary by sending the command REPLICAOF NO ONE and it will reconfigure the other replicas to follow the newly promoted primary.

Sentinel and Client Libraries
If you have a system that uses Sentinel for high availability, then you need to have a client that supports Sentinel. Not all libraries have this feature, but most of the popular ones do, so make sure you add it to your list of requirements when choosing your library.

Further Reading
For more information on Redis Sentinel, check out the documentation on redis.io.

## Sentinel Hands on
Exercise - Sentinel Hands-on
 Bookmark this page
Step 1
If you still have the primary and replica instances we set up in the previous exercise (3.2) - great! We’ll reuse them to create our Sentinel setup. If not - refer back to the instructions and go through them again.

When done, you will have a primary Redis instance with one replica.

Step 2
To initialise a Redis Sentinel, you need to provide a configuration file, so let’s go ahead and create one:

$ touch sentinel1.conf
Open the file and paste in the following settings:

port 5000
sentinel monitor myprimary 127.0.0.1 6379 2
sentinel down-after-milliseconds myprimary 5000
sentinel failover-timeout myprimary 60000
sentinel auth-pass myprimary a_strong_password
Breakdown of terms:

port - The port on which the Sentinel should run
sentinel monitor - monitor the Primary on a specific IP address and port. Having the address of the Primary the Sentinels will be able to discover all the replicas on their own. The last argument on this line is the number of Sentinels needed for quorum. In our example - the number is 2.
sentinel down-after-milliseconds - how many milliseconds should an instance be unreachable so that it’s considered down
sentinel failover-timeout - if a Sentinel voted another Sentinel for the failover of a given master, it will wait this many milliseconds to try to failover the same master again.
sentinel auth-pass - In order for Sentinels to connect to Redis server instances when they are configured with requirepass, the Sentinel configuration must include the sentinel auth-pass directive.
Step 3
Make two more copies of this file - sentinel2.conf and sentinel3.conf and edit them so that the PORT configuration is set to 5001 and 5002, respectively.

Step 4
Let’s initialise the three Sentinels in three different terminal tabs:

# Tab 1
$ redis-server ./sentinel1.conf --sentinel

# Tab 2
$ redis-server ./sentinel2.conf --sentinel

# Tab3
$ redis-server ./sentinel3.conf --sentinel
Step 5
If you connected to one of the Sentinels now you would be able to run many new commands that would give an error if run on a Redis instance. For example:

# Provides information about the Primary
SENTINEL master myprimary

# Gives you information about the replicas connected to the Primary
SENTINEL replicas myprimary

# Provides information on the other Sentinels
SENTINEL sentinels myprimary

# Provides the IP address of the current Primary
SENTINEL get-master-addr-by-name myprimary
Step 6
If we killed the primary Redis instance now by pressing Ctrl+C or by running the redis-cli -p 6379 DEBUG sleep 30 command, we’ll be able to observe in the Sentinels’ logs that the failover process will start in about 5 seconds. If you run the command that returns the IP address of the Primary again you will see that the replica has been promoted to a Primary:

redis> SENTINEL get-master-addr-by-name myprimary
1) "127.0.0.1"
2) "6380"